This document outlines the main course policies for CSSE403.

Instructor: Dr. Mike Hewner hewner@cs.duke.edu
TA: Qiulin Li qiulin.li@duke.edu 


# Introduction

This is a course about languages that go beyond the paradigms you are
familiar with.  Most of the languages we study are not currently
popular (though their adherents think they will be someday) but they
provide different perspectives on programming: perspectives that will
often seem bizarre and unusual.  The goal of the course is to
understand these perspectives, and perhaps take away a little insight
into our own everyday programming.  The secondary is goal is to
improve your skill in learning new programming languages.

Both of these will be most naturally addressed by writing a lot of
code, in a lot of strange languages.

# Book

Seven Languages in Seven Weeks by Bruce A. Tate

This book is optional but will be a useful reference as we will be
going through some languages that have less-than-detailed resources
available online.  It covers 3 of the 5 languages we'll do - Prolog,
Erlang, and Haskell.

There are both electronic and physical versions of the book available,
including DRM free PDFs – either is fine.  All versions are quite
affordable – please don’t pirate this textbook.

# Grading

| Category               | Weight |
|------------------------|--------|
| Small Assignments      | 40%    |
| Medium Assignments     | 40%    |
| Final Language Project | 20%    |


## Small Assignments

As we are introducing programming languages, there will be small daily
assignments.  You’ll submit them via Sakai.  These projects must be done
individually.

## Medium Assignments

There will also be 5 larger projects – one for each of the 5 main
programming languages we will be discussing in class.  These projects
can be done individually or in pairs.

*You are additionally required to have a score of at least 50% on all
of the Medium assignments*, or you will receive an F in the course.  If
you miss a deadline, talk to me and I’ll probably think of a way you
can make it up at least to the 50% level.  The reason for this policy
is that you are required to really become proficient in each of the
languages we study, which can’t really be done without experiencing it
on a larger project.

## Final Language Project

The last few weeks will be a team project where you will learn a new
programming language (your choice), do an in-class lecture about it
(with assignment), and do a large scale project appropriate to that
language.  Projects will be demoed during the final exam time (or
earlier, if your team finishes earlier).

## Final Exam

There is no final exam, but projects are demoed in the final exam
time.

# Getting Help

The course piazza is your place of first resort.  Please post
questions there and please respond to questions posted there.
Remember - everybody is having trouble coming up to speed quickly in
crazy programming languages - so don't hesitate to ask questions.

Prof. Hewner has online office hours 1pm-4pm Monday-Thursday via MS
Teams.  Submit a chat request to start with; it’s common things will
progress to a video chat/screen share if needed.  Note that this is a
really long range of office hours, meaning that occasionally
Prof. Hewner might be called away.  It is also common that there be
waiting for office hours near deadlines.  If your schedule is busy and
you need a pre-arranged block of time, email in advance to schedule a
meeting.

# Late Submissions

Late assignments are handled on a case-by-case basis.  If the excuse
seems reasonable (and the privilege is not getting repeatedly abused),
I generally offer 24 or 48 hour extensions (almost never more than
that, however).

# Academic Integrity

The Duke academic honestly policies are quite strict.  Please don't
cheat or it can end very badly!

Homework will be done on an individual basis except when explicitly
noted. The simple rule of thumb for individual work is:

Never give or use someone else’s code or written answers.

We encourage you to discuss the problems and general approaches to
solving them with other students. However, when it comes to writing
code, it should be your own work (or the work of your group if it is a
group or partner assignment). If you are having trouble understanding
how some library code works or pinning down a run-time or logic error
in your program, by all means talk to someone about it.

If you use someone else’s ideas in your solution (or any other work
that you do anywhere), you have to:

* give credit to that person in the comment section of your program, and
* be sure that you understand it as well as if it were your own.

If you are ever in doubt about whether some specific situation
violates the policy, the best approach is to discuss it with your
instructor beforehand. This is a very serious matter that we do not
take lightly. Nor should you.

You should never look at another student’s solution to get ideas of
how to write your own code. Beginning the process of producing your
own solution with an electronic copy of work done by other students is
never appropriate.

The least possible penalty for plagiarism or cheating is a -100% on
the assignment (that's negative points, not just 0 credit). In places
where the cheating seems intentional, the penalty is an automatic F in
the course. TO BE CLEAR: you can get an automatic F in this course if
you are caught cheating on one small assignment, even one time.
Further penalties may be leveled by the university.

